Document:   Static/Dynamic HTML area widget
Author:     Greg Beeley (GRB)
Date:       March 17th, 2000
MIME Type:  widget/html
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OVERVIEW

    The htmlarea widget provides a way to insert a plain HTML document into a
    Centrallix generated page, either in-flow (static) or in its own separate
    layer that can be reloaded at will (dynamic).  The HTML document can either
    be given in a property of the widget or can be referenced so that the HTML
    is read from an external document.

    The HTML area widget also can act as a mini-browser -- clicking on hyper-
    text links in the visible document will by default cause the link to be 
    followed, and the new document to be displayed in the HTML area (if the 
    HTML area is dynamic).

    Dynamic HTML areas also do double-buffering.  This is a workaround for a
    bug in Netscape which would normally cause a crash when the document that
    contains the clicked link is reloaded.  So, dynamic html areas actually use
    two layers, only one of which is visible at a time.  The linked-to document
    is then loaded in the invisible layer, and then the layer is shown later
    and the previously visible layer is hidden.


STRUCTURE FILE PROPERTIES

    The following properties are valid for a widget of type "widget/html":

        x		(integer) Specifies the x-position of the html area
			with respect to its parent container, in pixels.  Only
			meaningful on dynamic mode html areas.

	y		(integer) Specifies the y-position of the html area
			with respect to its parent container, in pixels.  Only
			meaningful on dynamic mode html areas.

	width		(integer) Specifies the wrapping width of the HTML
			area.

	height		(integer) Gives the height, in pixels, of the HTML
			area.

	mode		(string) Either "static" or "dynamic"; specifies 
			whether the HTML area is in-flow (static) or whether
			it is in its own layer (dynamic) that can be positioned
			and reloaded at will.

	source		(string) The ObjectSystem pathname of the document to
			be presented, or the HTTP URL of the document to be 
			presented.  HTTP URL's can only be used on dynamic 
			mode tables, and some functionality will be disabled
			if the URL isn't on the local server.

	prologue	(string) HTML text to be placed at the beginning of
			the html area.  Cannot be used if the "source" is an
			HTTP URL.

	content		(string) The content for the HTML area.  Typically
			used in lieu of "source", see above.

	epilogue	(string) HTML text to be placed at the end of the
			html area.  Cannot be used if the "source" is an HTTP
			URL.


EVENTS

    No events yet.


ACTIONS

    LoadPage - load a new document into a dynamic-mode HTML area.

        Source		(string) This parameter specifies the URL of the
			document to be loaded into the dynamic HTML area.


EXAMPLE USAGE

    HTMLArea "widget/html"
        {
	mode = dynamic
	x = 2
	y = 2
	width = 478
	height = 396
	source = "http://10.4.1.222:800/index.html"
	}

